Becoming a computer scientist: a report by the ACM committee on

 the status of women in computing science.



Authors:    Pearl, Amy; Pollack, Martha E.; Riskin, Eve; Thomas, Becky; Wolf,

           Elizabeth; Wu, Alice.



Journal:  Communications of the ACM, Nov. 1990, v33, n11, p47-58.



FULL TEXT COPYRIGHT Association for Computing Machinery, 1990.

Distributed with permission.



*Note*    Only Text is presented here; see printed issues for graphics.

Full Text:



BECOMING A COMPUTER SCIENTIST



It is well known that women are significantly underrepresented in scientific

fields in the United States, and computer science is no exception.  As of

1987-1988, women constituted slightly more than half of the U.S.  population

and 45% of employed workers in the U.S., but they made up only 30% of

employed computer scientists.  Moreover, they constituted only 10% of

employed doctoral-level computer scientists.  During the same time period,

women made up 20% of physicians and, at the doctoral level, 35% of

psychologists, 22% of life scientists, and 10% of mathematicians employed in

the U.S.  On the other hand, there are some disciplines in which women

represent an even smaller proportion at the doctoral level: in 1987-88, 8% of

physical scientists, and only 2.5% of engineers were women [21].  [1]  The

underrepresentation of women in computer science is alarming for at least two

reasons.  First, it raises the disturbing possibility that the field of

computer science functions in ways that prevent or hinder women from becoming

part of it.  If this is so, those in the discipline need to evaluate their

practices to ensure that fair and equal treatment is being provided to all

potential and current computer scientists.  Practices that exclude women are

not only unethical, but they are likely to thwart the discipline's progress,

as potential contributors to the field are discouraged from participation.



The second reason for concern about the underrepresentation of women in

computer science relates to demographic trends in the U.S., which suggest a

significant decrease in the number of white males entering college during the

next decade.  At the same time, the number of jobs requiring scientific or

engineering training will continue to increase.  Because white males have

traditionally constituted the vast majority of trained scientists and

engineers in this country, experts have predicted that a critical labor

shortage is likely early in the next century [4, 25].  To confront this

possibility, the federal government has begun to expend resources to study

the problem further.  A notable example is the establishment of a National

Task Force on Women, Minorities, and the Handicapped in Science and

Technology.  Their final report, issued in December of 1989, lists a number

of government and industrial programs aimed at preventing a labor shortage by

increasing the number of women and minorities trained as scientists and

engineers [5].



In light of these facts, the Committee on the Status of Women in Computer

Science, a subcommittee of the ACM's Committee on Scientific Freedom and

Human Rights, was established with the goal of studying the causes of women's

continued underrepresentation in the field, and developing proposed solutions

to problems found.  It is the committee's belief that the low number of women

working as computer scientists is inextricably tied up with the particular

difficulties that women face in becoming computer scientists.



Studies show that women in computer science programs in U.S.  universities

terminate their training earlier than men do.  Between 1983 and 1986 (the

latest year for which we have such figures) the percentage of bachelor's

degrees in computer science awarded to women was in the range of 36-37%,

while the percentage of master's degrees was in the range of 28-30%.  During

the same time span, the percentage of doctoral degrees awarded to women has

only been in the range of 10-12%, and it has remained at that level, with the

exception of a slight increase in 1989 [16, 21].  Moreover, the discrepancy

between the numbers of men and women continues to increase when we look at

the people who are training the future computer scientists: women currently

hold only 6.5% of the faculty positions in the computer science and computer

engineering departments in the 158 Ph.D.-granting institutions included in

the 1988-1989 Taulbee Survey (See Communications September 1990).  In fact, a

third of these departments have no female faculty members at all [16].  This

pattern of decreasing representation is generally consistent with that of

other scientific and engineering fields [4, 25].  It is often described as

"pipeline shrinkage": as women move along the academic pipeline, their

percentage continue to shrink.



The focus of this report is pipeline shrinkage for women in computer science.

We describe the situation forwomen at all stages of training in computer

science, from the precollege level through graduate school.  Because many of

the problems discussed are related to the lack of role models for women who

are in the process of becoming computer scientists, we also concern ourselves

with the status of women faculty members.  We not only describe the problems,

but also make specific recommendations for change and encourage further study

of those problems whose solutions are not yet well understood.



Of course, our focus on computer science in the university by no means

exhausts the set of issues that are relevant to an investigation of women in

computer science.  Most notably, we do not directly address issues that are

of concern exclusively or primarily to women in industry.  Although some of

the problems we discuss are common to all women computer scientists, there

are, without doubt, other problems that are unique to one group or the other.

Nonetheless, the committee felt that an examination of the process of

becoming a computer scientist provided a good starting point for a wider

investigation of women in the field.  Clearly, to increase the number of

women in industrial computer science, one must first increase the number of

women trained in the discipline.  Thus, we need to consider why women stop

their training earlier than men: too few women with bachelor's degrees in

computer science translates into too few women in both industry and academia.

Moreover, because of the documented positive effects of same-sex role models

[12], it is also important to consider why women drop out in higher numbers

than do men even later in their academic training: too few women with

doctorate degrees results in too few women faculty members.  This in turn

means inadequate numbers of role models for younger women in the process of

becoming computer scientists.



What is Special about

Computer Science?



There are many professions in which women are underrepresented.  Indeed, as

we noted earlier, underrepresentation of women is a fact in most scientific

disciplines, and the pipeline shrinkage pattern seen in computer science is

common to most sciences.  Thus, one of the first questions we need to ask is:

what, if anything, is different about computer science?  Are there any

special characteristics of the discipline that lead to unusual problems for

women?  Studies addressing these questions have been undertaken by both

computer scientists and social scientists, and have identified cultural

factors that are significant contributors to women's special experience in

computing.  These factors range from influences present in elementary-school

educational software through the experiences of computer science graduate

students.



Computers are encountered today by most children in this country more so than

the artifacts of other science and engineering fields, even if they never

study computer science in a formal educational setting.  The earliest

computer artifacts that children encounter are not gender neutral.

Recreational and educational software programs reflect the gender biases and

stereotypes of their designers, and studies reveal that educational software

is generally designed to appeal to boys.  For a host of reasons that are

beyond the scope of this report, girls and boys have been shown to prefer

different kinds of software programs.  It is thus disturbing that, in an

experimental setting, teachers instructed to design software for students

tended to build programs that have the characteristics that boys prefer, and

few characteristics that girls prefer--even when they are aware of these

differences [13].



In addition to abstract characteristics of software use, the cultural values

embedded in educational software and computer games that target adolescents

almost exclusively reflect what is commonly identified as adolescent male

culture.  The predominant themes of recreational computer games are war,

battles, crimes, destruction, and traditionally male-oriented sports and

hobbies [14].  Thus, it is not surprising that boys use computers in courses

and summer camps bothearlier and more often than do girls.



Experience in computer use, and a resulting comfort with and affinity for

computing, have a strong effect on the stsudy of computer science in the

university.  When college students encounter computer science, they already

perceive its strong cultural component.  Those who are knowledgeable about

computers are differentiated by special names (wizards, hackers, wheels), and

are expected to have distinguishing characteristics, language, and behaviors.

This "hacker elite" system, along with th relatively new academic structure

of computer science which may seem chaotic and confusing to students, results

in many "computing dropouts" who are alienated by the foreign culture [23].

Of course, these problems may affect male as well as female students, but the

situation is likely to be more pronounced for females who, because of the

differences in early experiences with computers, are less likely to be a part

of the elite.



The cultural factors we have described thus far appear to have an effect even

on women who are making their way successfully through the computer science

pipeline.  A study of doctoral students in a world-class computer science

department found that while male and female students exhibited comparable

performance quality in their studies, the women students felt much less

comfortable, confident, and successful than did the men [3].



It is important to acknowledge the significance of cultural influences in the

acceptance and success of women in computer science.  The studies we referred

to show that there are a number of aspects of the computer science culture

that may act against women.  Unfortunately, there are no easy solutions to

this problem.  There are a few specific and obvious recommendations that can

be made; for instance, more educational software appealing to girls should be

developed.  Similarly, educators and educational institutions must make a

concerted effort to ensure equal access to computers for boys and girls.

However, more far-reaching solutions are less tangible.  What appears to be

needed is increased sensitivity on the part of male computer scientists to

their female students and colleagues, an increased awareness by women so that

they will not be easily discouraged, and quite simply, an increased number of

women in the field.



In addition to the cultural barriers women face, they also encounter issues

of physical safety.  This is because, as is also the case for those in the

laboratory sciences, computer scientists must often be at their workplace

after dark.  This is particularly true of students who often do not have

computers or terminals at home.  The inability to use public terminal areas

after hours not only makes it difficult to complete one's assignments, but

also precludes informal interactions with other students, an integral part of

one's education.  For more senior computer scientists after hours access to

sophisticated computing systems that cannot be duplicated at home may be

necessary.



All computer scientists, male and female, require safe access to the

workplace, particularly at night.  Yet, for obvious reasons, such access is

even more essential for women.  Availability of a well-lit, short route to

the office from well-lit, safe parking and a sense of safety in the

department at night are crucial.  It is accepted academic and professional

practice to work at night, and women should be able to do so safely.  As

noted previously, working at home is not always possible.  If working at

night in the department or on public terminals is not feasible, a woman's

working hours are restricted to a subset of those available to her male

colleagues.  As one woman professor put it, "in many places it is a real

problem to do work at night for security reasons, but it is a necessity for

professional reasons" [16, p. 32].



One partial solution to this problem is to make campus administrators aware

of the issue, so that they will address it when planning new buildings and

parking areas.  Also useful are services that provide escorts for those

walking around campus after dark.  In addition, because the issue of safety

inside the office at night is equally important, it is crucial that safety

procedures such as keeping the building locked at night always be followed.

Consciousness-raising within computer science departments may help guarantee

that safety procedures are developed and consistently followed.  Finally, we

should find ways to take advantage of the fact that much computer science

research can be done remotely.  One recommendation is that funding agencies,

such as the National Science Foundation (NSF), provide small grants to female

professors to purchase terminals or workstations, printers, and modems for

home use, to redress partially the problem of unequal access to resources

[16, p. 32].  Male and female faculty advising female graduate students might

also find ways to loan such equipment to them.  Access to computing equipment

at home can also help women who are attempting to balance their careers with

family responsibilities that require them to be home in the evenings.  As we

will describe, the conflict between these two sets of responsibilities is

another source of difficulty for many women.



Other Obstracies for Women



Previously we described special characteristics of our discipline that

present challenges to women who are attempting to become computer scientists

or whose are training future computer scientists.  The majority of obstacles

for women in the discipline are also shared by other women scientists and

engineers, and to a lesser degree, by all other women employed outside the

home.  In our view, there are four primary and interrelated challenges facing

women:



* Difficulties with self-esteem,



* Lack of mentoring and role models,



* Gender discrimination, and



* Difficulties balancing career and family responsibilities.



We discuss each of these problems in turn, attempting again to suggest ways

to combat them.  If course, since these problems are not unique to women

becoming computer scientists, the soltions we propse may also hve wider

applicability.



Diminished Self-Esteem



Several studies of college students have shown that women experience a much

greater lack of self-esteem during their college years than do men.  In the

1988 American Association for the Advancement of Science Presidential Lecture

[25], Sheila Widnall noted that a recent survey of graduate students in

medicine, science, and engineering at Stanford University [26] found that

"that women were indistinguishable from the men in objective measures of

preparation, career aspirations, and performance in graduate school.  They

differed significantly in their perceptions of their preparation for graduate

study, in the pressures and roadblocks that they experienced, and in the

strategies that they developed for coping with these pressures.  .  .  .  30%

of the women versus 15% of the men questioned their ability to handle the

work; 27% versus 12% found criticism difficult to accept; only 30% of the

women versus 57% of the men felt confident speaking up in class; and 33

versus 9% feared that speaking up would reveal their inadequacies [25, pp.

1741, 1744]."



Widnall also reports on the Illinois Valedicatorian Project, which followed

80 high school valedictorians (46 women, 34 men) through their college years

[1].  At the end of their college careers, the women had a slightly higher

final grade point average than the men (3.6 vs.  3.5).  But the women had

experienced a significantly higher loss of self-esteem.  As high school

seniors, about 20% of both men and women ranked themselves as "far above

average," and about 45% as "above average."  As college sophomores, about 20%

of the men thought they were "far above average," as opposed to about 3% of

the women; about 50% of the men and a little more than 40% of the women

ranked themselves "above average."  By their senior year, 25% of the men and

none of the women thought they were "far above average," with about 55% of

the men and 70% of the women considering themselves "above average."

Overall, the self-confidence of the men increased slightly during college,

while that of the women decreased significantly.



It seems clear that the diminished self-esteem of female college students

contributes to the pipeline shrinkage problem.  Indeed, while the studies

that Widnall reports on refer to self-esteem problems of undergraduates,

similar problems may be even more significant at the graduate level, where

students receive primarily subjective feedback from their advisors and peers,

as opposed to the more objective feedback of test scores and course grades

available to undergraduates.  An additional complicating factor is the

differing communication styles of men and women.  Studies have shown that in

group settings, women are interrupted more frequently than men, and their

contributions are often either attributed to men or ignored altogether [10,

11, 25].  Such experiences are likely to exacerbate an existing lack of

self-confidence.



Diminished self-esteem may well cause a woman to not consider valid career

options, because she believes that she is not sufficiently well qualified.

Even women who consider themselves to be as well qualified as most of their

male peers may lower their career goals when they recognize the additional

problems that women may face.  As widnall points out:



"A second trend noted in [the Illinois valedicatorian Project] was the

lowering of career ambitions by the women students.  The researchers linked

lowered career ambitions in part to the unresolved dual-career problem.  .  .

.  One of the most effective antidotes for these uncertainties about career

goals was the opportunity for successful professional experiences:

independent research, professional employment, opportunity for interaction

with graduate students, and the support and encouragement of a faculty mentor

[25, p. 1743]."



Those who train women to become computer scientists need to become aware of

the problem of diminished self-esteem, and work to combat it.  Toward this

end, it is important to give students unambiguous feedback concerning the

quality of their work, to provide equal attention to and have equal

expectations of female and male students, and to increase awareness of

different, especially less aggressive, communication styles.  In addition, it

is essential to provide women with the opportunity for successful

professional experiences.  computer science faculty need to make an effort to

draw women into their research projects.  Whle this is of course true of

faculty members training graduate students, efforts to include females in

research projects should ideally begin at the undergraduate level.  Support

must therefore be given to funding that will facilitate this, both at the

national and institutional levels.  An example of a model program is the

National Science Foundation's Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)

program [19], the goal of which is to provide research opportunities for

undergraduates in the sciences.  RUI awards are limited to projects that

include significant undergraduate participation.  By using programs such as

the RUI to bring women to research early in their careers, faculty members

may help combat diminished self-esteem in women and its impact on attrition.



Mentoring and role Models



Another major problem facing women in the process of becoming computer

scientists is a shortage of mentors.  Mentors play a crucial, though usually

informal, role in the training of young computer scientists.  In general, a

mentor shares with a less experienced colleague information about how to get

research funding, avenues for publication, the informal power structure

within a department and within the discipline as a whole, and so on.  Mentors

may invest a good deal of time in their junior colleagues and may offer them

important opportunities for research collaboration.



Currently, women are much more likely than men to be mentored by female

faculty members [1, 19].  However, there is no reason that men cannot serve

as mentors for women, given an appropriate sensitivity to the problems that

women in computer science may face.  Indeed, because the number of women

computer scientists shrinks as one progresses through the pipeline, it is

unreasonable to expect senior women to mentor all of the junior women.  Men

in computer science must also support younger women.



Related to mentoring is the issue of role models.  While young computer

scientists can benefit from mentors of either gender, it is desirable for

women to be exposed to female role models.  A role model can serve as

evidence that a successful career in computer science is not only a

possibility, but a normal and unremarkable option for women.  The existence

of role models does matter, and it matters to women at all stages of their

careers.  For students, female faculty members prove, by their very

existence, that Ph.D.  degrees and faculty slots can be attained by women

[11, 12].  A similar phenomenon is true of female faculty members who serve

as role models for their more junior colleagues.  Junior women who have

access to senior female faculty members adjust to their positions and

establish research programs more quickly than those who do not [7].



Of course, the only real solution to the lack of role models is to increase

the number of women in computer science: recall that only 6.5% of computer

science and computer engineering faculty at the Taulbee institutions are

female.  However, until this situation improves, programs that make

successful women more visible can help.  Examples are programs that bring

women scientists to campuses for a short period of time to give a talk, or

for a longer period of time in a visiting faculty position.  Activities of

the former sort can be encouraged by anyone who is involved in a departmental

colloquium or seminar series.  Invitation for a longer period requires

additional funding; one source of support is the NSF's Visiting

Professorships for Woman program [22].



At the undergraduate level, it is useful to design programs in which

undergraduates are paired with female graduate students and/or faculty.

Examples of successful programs of this kind include one run by the Women's

Science and Engineering Network at Stanford University [24] and the Women in

Science Program at the University of Michigan [25].  Such programs can have

the additional benefit of providing graduate women with the experience of

being viewed as capable and successful scientists.



Finally, we should point out that role models are important even to

precollege women.  Without sufficient role models, high school girls may end

their mathematics and science training prematurely, thus precluding a major

in science or engineering before they even begin college.  High school

guidance counselors and math and science teachers can play a role here by

encouraging capable young women to consider science and engineering as valid

career options.  Several programs have been developed to encourage high

school girls to acquire sufficient training to keep their options open.

Perhaps the most extensive program of this kind is administered by the

Math/Science Network, a non-profit organization that organizes conferences

under the title of "Expanding Your Horizons in Science and Mathematics" [7].

These conferences bring high school girls together with local female

scientists.  Other more local programs include science fairs, sponsored by

schools, scouting troops, or similar organizations, in which women are

included among the judges.  To increase the influence of science fairs, they

may be augmented with career awareness workshops in which participating

students can meet with local scientists and engineers to learn about career

paths and the educational prerequisites for technical careers.



Discrimination



The issue of gender discrimination is of course a large one, which cannot be

discussed in great depth here.  By gender discrimination, we mean patronizing

behavior and assumptions that women are less qualified and/or committed than

men, regardless of whether the assumptions are conscious or unconscious.  A

detailed discussion of the problem of gender discrimination as it relates to

women in computer science departments can be found in the 1983 report

"Barriers to Equality in Academia," which was written by a group of female

graduate students and research staff in the computer science department at

MIT [2].  This influential report notes that the cumulative effects of subtle

discrimination may be even more harmful than relatively infrequent incidents

of overt discrimination:



"Often, subtle behavior is not recognized as discriminatory, for two reasons.

First, the actions often are not intended to be discriminatory; the people

who convey biased attitudes toward women may be well-intentioned.

Nevertheless, the effect of their behavior is to undermine the professional

image of women held by their colleagues and the women themselves.  Second,

any particular incident might appear trivial when viewed by itself.  However,

when women experience such incidents daily, the overall effect of the

environment is much greater than the sum of the individual incidents.

Because subtle discrimination is harder to recognize than overt

discrimination, it sometimes does more damage.  Constant exposure to negative

comments diminishes a woman's self-esteem and may lead her to believe that

she cannot succeed [2, p. 3]."



Several reports issued by the Project on the Status and Education of Women

(PSEW) of the Association of American Colleges address the subject of gender

discrimination as it relates to women undergraduates, graduate students, and

faculty [10, 11].  These reports concur with the MIT report's observations on

the chilling effect of cumulative incidents of discrimination:



"Overtly disparaging remarks about women, as well as more subtle differential

behaviors, can have a critical and lasting effect.  When they occur

frequently--especially when they involve "gatekeepers" who teach required

courses, act as advisors, or serve as chairs of departments--such behaviors

can have a profound negative impact on women's academic and career

development by: ...  causing students to switch majors or subspecialties

within majors.  .  .  ; minimizing the development of the individual

collegial relationships with faculty which are crucial for future

professional development; dampening career aspirations; and undermining

confidence [10, p. 3]."



The PSEW reports, by documenting manifestations of both overt and subtle

gender discrimination throughout academia, provide evidence that the problems

described in the MIT report are not unique to computer science.



A recent study of several science and engineering departments also draws the

connection between gender discrimination and the effective exclusion of women

from first-class citizenship in their departments.  The study states that

"differential attention to women students was felt to promote performance

stress while exclusion from informal relations was a career handicap" [6].



A particular manifestation of the differential attention paid to females in

the field is what has been called the "invisibility syndrome."  Not only is

the percentage of women in computer science smaller than the percentage of

women in the general population, but also, even within the field, women are

underrepresented in many important professional activities.  Ideally, the

representation of women in the perceived power structure of a community

should reflect their numbers in that community.  One would expect reasonable,

non-token representation of women on the editorial boards of technical

journals; as guest editors of special issues of journals; on program

committees of technical conferences; as invited speakers both at conferences

and at departmental colloquia; on executive boards of professional

organizations such as ACM and IEEE; and on policy boards such as the

Computing Research Association (Formerly the Computer Research Board) and the

Computer Science and Technology Board.



Unfortunately, even those women who have been successful often appear to be

invisible, and are not invited to participate in activities of this type to

the same degree as their male counterparts.  One way to address this problem

is to make people aware of it, so that those whose job it is to nominate or

appoint people to boards, program committees, etc., can make a conscious

effort to include qualified women.  Another solution, towards which some

women in the field have begun to work, is to compile lists of qualified women

in various areas of computer science who can be suggested to those who are

responsible for issuing invitations and nominations.



Not only do women often find themselves subject to the type of unintentional

discrimination described so far, but they may also be confronted with

instances of more overt discrimination or even sexual harassment.  It is

therefore necessary that departments and universities develop and institute

grievance procedures that guarantee confidentiality and freedom from

retaliation.  We recommend further study of already implemented grievance

procedures to determine policies necessary to ensure their effectiveness.



The author of the MIT study, like those of the PSEW reports, state that

"responsibility for change rests with the entire community, not just with the

women," and that "many problems would be alleviated by increasing the number

of women" [2, p. 1].  We agree completely, and recommend that the kinds of

actions we have proposed elsewhere in the report be adopted to help increase

women's representation in the field.



Balancing Responsibilities



A final issue that is of central concern involves the difficulties in

balancing the responsibilities of a career in computer science with the

responsibilities of raising a family.  Concern with this problem may lead

young women to abandon the possibility of a career in computer science (or

any other science) at a very early stage in their training, as indicated in

the quotation from the Widnall report noted earlier ("researchers linked

lowered career ambitions in part to the unresolved dual-career problem").

Actual difficulties encountered in achieving this balance may result in women

leaving computer science later in their careers.  Of course, in their concern

with this problem, women considering or pursuing careers in computer science

are not very different from women in a wide range of other careers--or, for

that matter from many men in those careers.  Last April, a New York Times

article noted, "Fathers, too, are seeking a balance between their families

and careers."  However, while achieving such a balance may be difficult for

people pursuing many different careers, there are certain aspects of a

tenure-track position in a scientific field that render the balancing act

particularly difficult [18].



The typical "tenure-track" career path appears to be generally incompatible

with outside interests and responsibilities including, but not limited to,

childbearing and rearing.  Junior faculty in tenure-track positions (like

junior lawyers working towards partnerships, junior investment bankers trying

to become vice presidents, etc.) are expected to devote enormous amounts of

time and energy to their careers: so much time and energy that serious

outside interests are precluded or at least greatly constrained.  The model

for an academic career was developed during a time in which faculty positions

were primarily occupied by men who had wives to tend to their home

responsibilities.  We call this the helpmate-in-the-background model.  It is

one that is still present today: an illustration can be found in the

acknowledgments statement of many academic books.  An example, from a recent

book authored by a male computer scientist, includes a statement of gratitude

to his wife "for sheltering [him] from the travails of the real world."



The problem is that the helpmate-in-the-background model is inappropriate for

today's society, in which both men and women should have the right, and often

have the obligation, to have careers.  The model is most obviously

inappropriate for women.  Women were the helpmates-in-the-background: they do

not typically have helpmates of their own.



Further complicating the situation is the fact of women's "biological

clocks."  Most students do not complete the Ph.D.  until the middle or late

20s and tenure is typically not granted until the middle 30s.  Hence, the

childbearing years directly coincide with the period of time during which a

woman is completing her Ph.D.  and working towards tenure.  Both rearing

small children and achieving tenure are tremendously time-consuming efforts;

doing both at the same time seems to many women to be exceptionally

difficult, if not impossible [6].



There are a number of things that can be done to help women achieve a balance

between family responsibilities and career demands.  For example,

universities can and should provide affordable, quality childcare.

Sufficient maternity leave policies are also necessary.  Many universities

have no formal leave policy at all, while others grant only minimal leaves

(e.g., one month or less).  A few will allow women a semester off from

teaching responsibilities, at reduced pay.  At those universities that do not

offer this option, female faculty are often put in the position of having to

try to "time" their babies for semesters that they had planned to take off

anyway, such as summer semesters, sabbatical periods, or semesters during

which they used grant money to "buy out" of teaching.  However, the first of

these options is often not viable, since most computer science faculty do not

have the summer off; instead, they use this period to work on research

grants, generally a requirement for tenure.  The latter two options generally

require that the woman already have tenure or at least be fairly close to it.

Moreover, attempts to schedule a baby's arrival are far from reliable, and

often fail.  Thus, better maternity leave policies are obviously needed.



But solutions like these do not go far enough.  Fundamental changes in the

patterns of academic careers are required.  These changes must rest on a

realization that it is the responsibilities of parenting a small child, and

not the responsibilities of mothering a small child, that are incompatible

with current work requirements.  The model of a helpmate-in-the-background

should be as untenable for men in today's society as it is for women.



It is true that there are issues that will always be specific to

women--pregnancy, childbirth, and lactation--and career paths must be

designed with these in mind.  But there are other realities of women's lives

that should be seen merely as traditionally women's.  Many of these can and

should be shared by men.  For example, universities must develop not just

maternal policies, but parental policies that will allow male as well as

female faculty members to be involved in the rearing of small children.  Many

universities today provide no parental leave at all.  Yet, fathers not only

need time off immediately after the birth of a child, but also, like mothers,

need reduced workloads for an extended period of time, to enable them to

participate in the rearing of their small children.  Thus, another important

policy that must be developed, for both men and women, involves changing the

way in which the tenure clock operates.



As with maternity leaves, different universities have different policies

regarding slowing the tenure clock to allow a faculty member to care for a

small child.  Differences involve: (1) whether any slowing of the tenure

clock is allowed at all; (2) whether it is permitted only for the "primary

caretaker" or whether it is permitted for both parents; (3) whether it is

permitted for adoptions; (4) the period of time for which the clock is

stopped (typically, one semester); (5) the number of children for which this

is allowed (typically one, sometimes two).  In our view, some kind of reduced

work load is essential to permit faculty members who wish to do so to better

balance their family responsibilities with their careers.  Moreover, this

option should be available to fathers as well as mothers.  There have been

some doubts expressed about this solution: the claim is that fathers will

"take advantage" of the situation by stopping the tenure clock even though

they are not participating heavily in the rearing of their child.  The worry

is that if this happens, the default tenure period will simply become seven

years instead of six, and women who do take primary responsibility for the

rearing of their children will once again be at a disadvantage.



In our view, this possibility must be faced, but it appears that one solution

is to make a strong effort not to change the standards for tenure.  That is,

departments must continue to impose the same tenure requirements as they do

now, but must assume that some faculty members will take seven or eight years

to meet those requirements rather than six.  We need to expect that, at least

in the beginning, some faculty members may take the extra year or two even if

they do not have additional child-rearing demands.  As long as the standards

are not raised, which would penalize those with additional responsibilities,

this is not a dire consequence.



Because the issues surrounding leave policies, deferred tenure, and related

issues are so complex, we recommend a systematic study of policies in

academic departments, to better evaluate the options.  It is even possible

that the conclusion of such a study will be that the entire tenure process is

incompatible with the demands of a dual-career society.  After all, the

demands of rearing a small child do not stop after six weeks or one semester

or even one year of a leave.  When the helpmate-in-the-background model is

thrown out, it needs to be replaced with a much more flexible one in which

people are free to move on and off of a "fast track" at different stages in

their career, without those moves permanently jeopardizing that career.  This

is exactly what tenure precludes: if a faculty member is not fully committed

to his or her academic career during the very same period of time in which he

or she is most likely to face the demands of raising small children, tenure

is unlikely to be granted and the academic career will be permanently

stalled.



Although we have emphasized that the traditional helpmate-in-the-background

model works against women with children, we believe it also works against

women without children and men with employed wives.  Few of these people have

such helpmates.



In our view, it is important to work to change the helpmate-in-the-background

mode.  It must be possible for both women and men to work hard and well at a

career, without neglecting their personal lives.  We believe this will

eventually be advatageous for both men and women.  There is great

satisfaction to be found in one's work, but there is also great satisfaction

to be found in one's personal life.  No one should have to choose one at the

expense of the other.



Reopening the Pipeline



As a result of the kinds of problems we have discussed, many women have

dropped out of the computer science pipeline prematurely.  Although we have

been focusing on ways to reverse this trend, an additional approach to

correcting the problem of underrepresentation is to help women reenter the

pipeline after dropping out of it early.  One example of a particularly

successful reentry program is the University of California at Berkeley

program, which has been in existence since 1983.  It is aimed at making

graduate study in computer science possible for women and minority students

who have received a bachelor's degree in another field.  Students in the

Berkeley reentry program take regular computer science courses along with

undergraduates, and in addition receive a host of support services.  The

program has been producing graduates for seven years now, and students who

have completed the program have been quite successful in gaining admission to

competitive graduate programs in computer science [9].



A second set of women for whom reopening the pipeline may be useful are those

with science degrees who are not employed in science.  A 1976 NSF program,

called the Science Career facilitation (SCF) Projects, was aimed at such

women.  This extensive program, which was later discontinued, funded 21

projects in fields where women were poorly represented even though jobs were

readily available.  Three of these 21 projects dealt with women reentering

computer science.



An evaluation of the SCF projects led to several important findings.  The

primary reasons most women cited for having dropped out of science involved

family responsibilities.  Research supported by the SCF projects surveyed

more than 2000 organizations providing potential employment to scientists,

and revealed that none of them attended to the needs of reentering women.

Yet programs that do address this would appear to be very useful: after all,

more than 585,000 women scientists expressed an interest in retraining and

reentry.  Finally, the SCF projects that provided this retraining were quite

successful: in total, 65% of the participants were reemployed in science

while another 10% became full-time graduate students [15].



Conclusions



We have presented some of the problems facing women who are in the process of

becoming computer scientists, as well as the women who are training them, and

we have made recommendations for change (see sidebar).  There appear to be

clear and relatively easily implemented solutions for some problems, while

for others, such as the apparent conflict between child-rearing and gaining

tenure, the issues are more complex and further study is required to develop

effective solutions.  Indeed, complete resolution of some of these problems

will depend upon significant societal changes.  Ultimately, everything hinges

on increasing the number of women in the field.  We must make sure that

increased representation of women is not stalled because of policies or

practices of computer science educators or employers.



Obviously, this article is not comprehensive.  We have not, for example,

addressed problems unique to women in industrial computer science, nor have

we considered how the problems we have described are exacerbated for women of

color or disabled women.  We believe it is important that these issues be

examined, but we leave them for other articles.



(1) Statistics were also acquired from the U.S.  Bureau of Labor Statistics

in a telephone conversation.



References



[1] Arnold K.  Retaining high-achieving women in science and engineering.  In

AAAS Symposium on Women and Girls in Science and Technology, (July 1987).

Univ.  of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.



[2] Barriers to equality in academia: Women in computer science at MIT.

Laboratory for Computer Science and the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at

M.I.T., 1983.



[3] Burton, M. D.  Gender differences in professional socialization: A study

of women and men becoming computer scientists.  Tech.  Rep., Carnegie- Mellon

University, Pittsburgh, PA, June 1987.  Committee on Social Science Research

in Computing, Social and Decision Sciences Department.



[4] Changing America: The new face of science and engineering--Interim Rep.

The Task Force on Women, Minorities, and the Handicapped in Science and

Technology, Washington, D.C., 1988.



[5] Changing America: The new face of science and engineering--Final Rep.

The Task Force on Women, Minorities, and the Handicapped in Science and

Technology, Washington, D.C., 1989.



[6] Etzkowitz, H., Kemelgor, C., and Neuschatz, M.  The final disadvantage:

Barriers to women in academic science and engineering.  Tech.  Rep.,

Rensselaer Polytechnic Inst.  Center for Science and Technology.



[7] Failor, B.  The History of EYH.  Math/Science Network Broadcast, (Winter

1990), 5.



[8] Gilbert, L., Gallesich, J. M., and Evans, S. L.  Sex of faculty role

model and students' self-perceptions of competency.  Sex Roles 9, 5

(597-607), 1983.



[9] Grigolia, M.  Computer Science Reentry Program.  Comp.  Res.  News, 2, 2

(april 19, 1990).



[10] Hall, R. M. and Sandler, B. R.  The classroom climate: A chilly one for

women?  Project on the Status and Education of Women, Association of American

Colleges, Washington, D.C., 1982.



[11] Hall, R. M. and Sandler B. R.  the classroom climate revisited: Chilly

for women faculty, administrators, and graduate students.  Project on the

Status and Education of Women, Association of American Colleges, Washington,

D.C., 1986.



[12] Hornig, L.S.  Women in science and engineering: Why so few?  Tech.

Rev., 87, 8 (31)-41), 1984.



[13] Huff, C. and Cooper, J.  Sex bias in educational software: The effect of

designers' stereotypes on the software they design.  J. Applied Soc.  Psych.,

17, 6 (1987), 519-532.



[14] Kiesler, S., Sproull, L., and Eccles, J.S.  Pool halls, chips, and war

games: Women in the culture of computing.  Psych.  of Women Q., 9 (1985),

451-462.



[15] Lantz, A.  An Evaluation of Programs for Reentry of Women Scientists.

In S. Humphreys, Ed., Women and Minorities in Science: Strategies for

Increasing Participation.  Westview Press, 1982).



[16] Leveson, N. Women in computer science: A Report for the NSF CISE Cross

Directorate Activities Advisory Committee, 1989.



[17] Long, J. S.  The origins of sex differences in science.  Social Forces.

To be published.



[18] Marriage, family, and scientific careers: Institutional policy versus

research findings.  American Association for the Advancement of Science.  In

Proceedings of a Symposium at the Annual Meeting of the AAAS (1989).



[19] NSF.  Research in undergraduate institutions (RUI).  Program

Announcement, Directorate for Scientific, Technological, and International

Affairs, 1989.



[20] NSF.  Visiting professorships for women.  Grants for Research and

Education in Science and Engineering Program Announcement, October 1989.



[21] Report on women and minorities in science and engineering.  National

Science Foundation, Washington, D.C., 1988.



[22] Sloat, B.  Women in science: A university program of intervention,

out-reach, and research.  In Second International Interdisciplinary Congress

on Women (April 1984.  Gorningen, the Netherlands).



[23] Sproull, L. S., Kiesler, S., and Zubrow, D.  Encountering an Alien

Culture.  J. of Soc.  Issues 40, 3 (1984), 31-48.



[24] Sursock, A.  The women's science and engineering network.  European

Journal of Physics, 8, 2 (1987), 151-152.



[25] Widnall, S. E.  AAAS Presidential Lecture: Voices from the pipeline.

Science, 2 1 (1988), 1740-1745.



[26] Zappert, L. T., and Stanbury, K.  In the pipeline: A comparative

analysis of men and women in graduate programs in science, engineering, and

medicine at Stanford University.  Tech.  Rep.  Working Paper 20, Institute

for Research on Women and Gender, Standford University Stanford, CA, 1984.



THE AUTHORS:



AMY PEARL has an M.S.  from Stanford University and is currently a member of

the technical staff at Sun Microsystems.  Her interests include development

of software tools and mechanisms in the areas of hypertext and large software

engineering projects.



MARTHA E. POLLACK received a Ph.D.  from the University of Pennsylvania and

is presently a computer scientist in the Artificial Intelligence Center at

SRI International and a senior researcher at the Center for the Study of

Language and Information at Stanford University.  Her research interests

include AI plan generation and recognition and experimental evaluation of AI

systems.



EVE RISKIN is an assistant professor in the Department of Electrical

Engineering at the University of Washington.  She holds a Ph.D.  from

Stanford University and her research interests include image compression and

processing, medical imaging and pattern recognition.



BECKY THOMAS is a Ph.D.  candidate in the Computer Science Department at

Stanford University.  Her research area is formalisms for representing and

reasoning about time, knowledge and action.



ELIZABETH WOLF is a Ph.D.  candidate in the Computer Science Department at

Stanford University where she earned her M.S.  Her research interests include

mathematical theory of computation and formal verification.



ALICE WU is pursuing an M.S.  in computer science from Stanford University.

Her concentration is in software systems design, with emphasis on user

interface and human-computer interaction.



